Welcome to Mouth Off, a podcast brought to you by Forget Me Not Productions.
My name is Clary Sadler, and on today's episode, I'm going to be talking about the I Plus Matter
project, which is a heritage lottery funded project conceived by T. Gwynn Special School
in Cardiff and inclusive arts organization Forget Me Not Productions. I Plus Matter
provided multiple opportunities for meaningful assistive technology experiences. These were
interwoven with the arts, and music was used as a motivator to enable individuals with the most
complex physical and cognitive disabilities to share their own history and celebrate their
independent achievements. The project was launched in February 2020 and was due to conclude in July
of that year. We were going to have a training event called I Plus Matter Festival, and it was
going to involve professionals in the field of special education and social and health sectors.
It was also going to be a celebration of the achievements of all involved. The participants
would use a range of assistive technology such as eye gaze, switches, and touch monitors in order to
help them achieve and independently take part in music and arts sessions.
Due to COVID-19, the project was postponed and we had to adapt the sharing event and the training
event to fit a virtual platform. Pupils at five local special schools, adults from a local day center,
and three individuals all with complex needs took part in assistive technology and inclusive art
sessions called Music Can. Music Can is a protocol developed by Forget Me Not production, and it uses music
primarily as a motivator to engage individuals with the most complex needs in assistive technology.
T. Gwynn School were the project lead and other partners included My Sebu Special School, Trinity
Field Special School, Park Lane Special School, Gadliss Day Center, and three private clients that had all
worked with Forget Me Not productions in the past. Most of the face-to-face Music Can sessions had resumed by the end of 2021,
but sadly due to ongoing COVID-19 restrictions, Trinity Field Special School had to pull out.
Luckily, a Skolhenvelin Special School stepped in and had the remaining sessions, enabling us to wrap up the project.
So what exactly do we mean by assistive technology? Well, for the purpose of this project, we are using the term
assistive technology to include any specialist technology that enables access to a computer.
So things such as switches, touch monitors, eye gaze, which is a computer that is operated by eye movements,
and these are linked to specialist software for teaching cause and effect, choice making and beyond,
augmentative and alternative communication, or AAC, specialist controls for wheelchair driving,
and access to toys and play.
So when eye gaze first became commercially available, it was really mostly suited for
people who were already at a level of using AAC, and perhaps were using AAC with switches,
switches being very effective, but slow, slow and laborious.
Another focus of iPlus Matter has been to provide staff members with the opportunities to be trained in
the implementation of assistive technology systems for those with the most complex disabilities.
Why do you think projects such as this, iPlus Matter, funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund,
are so important for the individuals that have been taking part from your school?
When they see assistive technology, like we did have ideas on case machines here, but they've become old,
and they've been broken, and they're obsolete. So it's only now that we've started to use the
ideas because we've all returned to your project and brought them in, and we're using one pair of
different ideas in. So we're trying to re-establish those, and also we want to start training the staff,
and really to see what opportunities we can use with the ideas. It's wonderful with your project,
because you can see how well the children have responded to it, and how much you really need that in our school.
What have been the main benefits that you've seen from the individuals that have taken part in the project?
So to see how much they've progressed in the two weeks has been amazing. I think it's fantastic.
When they get to experience technology, and staff get to see what they're capable of by using that
technology, which gives us input as then to move forward with purchasing them ourselves and developing
those skills. And pupils get to be able to be part of a project. Parents can share and see that project,
and see what the children are working on. And I know the way that our pupils have responded, they've
focused, and they've really enjoyed it. And I think music is such a wonderful access around
pupils anyway. So it's just a wonderful way for them to be focused and to be able to get into that
niche, and they are there. Absolutely. What are the main barriers for these individuals
achieving independently within a school or daycare setting? The challenge is they need more
like consistency, and they need more technology things to come in for the children to help them progress
higher than where they already are. One of the main aims of the project has been to empower individuals
identified as experiencing profound and multiple learning disabilities, or individuals that have
complex physical disabilities. These individuals use assistive technology to experience independent
achievement. And throughout the project, we use the Music Can framework to motivate engagement with this
technology, changing and shifting the focus from disability to ability. When I started making music with
forget-forgetting the not productions, it changed my life. Music transformed me. We hope to raise awareness
also of the historical development of assistive technologies and the potential impact for independent
learning via new technologies and new techniques. We speak to Mel Sadler about the history of assistive technology.
But of course, by far, the biggest development for assistive technology, particularly for those individuals with the
with the greatest cognitive impairment has been the development of eye gaze. So eye gaze worked really well for that group of
people straight away. But it took some time for eye gaze to be suited for software to come out and be made available
for people with more significant intellectual impairments as well as their physical disability. But once software such as
look to learn and sensory eye effects and some of the inclusive technology softwares became available
for eye gaze users, it's really opened up a whole new world for that group of learners, which is just amazing.
And you see people making choices using eye gaze, who I would have considered it being very difficult to teach them to make choices using switches,
because using switches to make choices is a much higher cognitive load, if that makes sense. Yet, they can do it with eye gaze.
We also talked to assistive technology guru Carol Thornette. Dr. Carol Thornette has been involved in the field of
assistive technology since 1986. She was a pioneer in exploring the use of assistive technology with individuals
experiencing profound and multiple learning disabilities. In fact, it was Carol that developed the first mobility platform,
which was originally part of the Spastic Society research project and had the aim of enabling children with cerebral palsy
to explore mobility when their peers were able to.
With mobility, trying to get children mobile at the same age that their peers would be mobile,
since they extrapolated to those with learning difficulties and a physical difficulty obviously as well.
But initially, it was just a physical difficulty. That proved to be really exciting.
And I think it's quite sad now that I've seen so few with independent mobility. They should be in their usual seating.
Because that was always such a problem if they went to a wheelchair service, in that, you know, what seating would they use?
So this was, you know, that's really the reason why it was a platform.
That you could attach the whole seating system so that you started by looking at whether they could control it and what they would do and, you know, if they stopped.
And stopping is as important as going and so on.
The historic Criager Park School has also been our heritage partner throughout the iPlusmatter sessions.
Criager Park House is a country house in Pentirk, Cardiff.
It was built in 1914 for a colliery owner named Thomas Evans.
Evans died in 1943 and Criager Park then came into the possession of the National Coal Board before being sold in 1954 to the Spastic Society.
They opened a residential school site in 1955 and the house still operates as a residential care facility today.
It is also a special school for young adults with learning disabilities, which is operated by Salutum Healthcare.
The school I work in is catered for people with disabilities.
Research the school you're going to work in and the students you're going to work with.
And then it's just a case of getting to know your colleagues and them getting to know you.
And that should make your job hopefully a lot easier.
That was one of the first things people used to look at and say.
That I'm probably a student, but that doesn't happen anymore because I'm older and I grow beards and stuff like that.
So that tends not to happen anymore.
Well, my powered wheelchair, it can, well the batteries last longer, which means I can stay out for longer.
I can socialise for longer and be in work for longer.
So as you can see, the chair, the chair that I'm sitting in is actually rising, which then also helps me in my job professionally when I'm working with students with standing frames,
who aren't in standing frames, sorry, and also helps me socially when there is no seating available for other people.
I can then rise myself up to the level that the person is standing to.
And then when I'm, when I'm done, you just go back down.
So it's basically far different now to how it used to be.
Um, there's no comparison because now I can turn lights on using my voice.
Whereas when I was younger, I wasn't able, well, I wasn't able to really, I wasn't able to really reach the light switches due to them being on a different level.
So what would you say you're most proud of something you've achieved, maybe through your use of technology that's helped you achieve that thing?
Could be related to school or it could be...
Games.
Games?
And remote control.
Controls.
Yes.
I need help trying out accessible instruments.
I need help accessing music tech and recording studios.
This is what we're doing through us really, isn't it?
I guess remotely in the house.
When I started making music with Forget Me Not Productions, it changed my life.
Music transformed me.
I feel like I'm finally using my brain properly.
Join me next time when I interview Yvonne Kinnicky.
Yvonne is a programmer and curator specializing in black independent film.
Music
No.